docs: add lms for data post (#8222)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/lms-for-data/index.qmd

print(sql)
```

1. Create a natural language query
2. Provide the table names, schemas, and previews
3. Generate the SQL string

```{python}
r = imdb_title_basics.sql(sql) # <1>
r
```

1. Execute the SQL string on the table

## Issues with language models today

The biggest model with language models today is the cost. Similarly, the time
for inferencing these models is the second biggest concern. Generating millions
of synthetic data points with state-of-the-art LLMs is prohibitively expensive
and slow.

Smaller open source language models can reduce this cost to practically zero,
but at the expensive of quality. And generating synthetic data is likely even
slower. 

## Looking forward

In a future post, we'll explore using open source language models on a laptop to
achieve similar results. In general, I expect language models with data to
become increasingly commonplace. Some predictions:

- small, specialized language models will become common
- large language models that require expensive GPU clusters will still be the
 best for general-purpose tasks
- data assistants will be gimmicky for a while, but will eventually become
 useful

> Keep an eye out for our own gimmicky data assistant soon...

Author: needs more work

---

> title: "Using language models for data"

Reviewer: `for data` is a bit generic. maybe `for data synthesis and analytics`?

Author: are there use cases you have in mind that aren't covered in this post?

author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-02-05"
image: thumbnail.png
categories:
    - blog
    - llms
    - duckdb
---

## Overview

This post will give an overview of how (large) language models (LMs) fit into
data engineering, data analyst, and data science workflows.

## Use cases

There are three main use cases for language models for data practitioners:

1. Synthetic data generation
2. Natural language processing
3. Writing analytic code

We'll describe each and then demonstrate them with code.

## Setup

> We'll use [Marvin](https://askmarvin.ai), the AI engineering toolkit, alongside

Reviewer: why marvin?

[Ibis](https://ibis-project.org), the data engineering toolkit, to demonstrate
the capabilities of language models for data using the default DuckDB backend.

:::{.callout-tip}
We'll use a cloud service provider (OpenAI) to demonstrate these capabilities.
In a follow-up post, we'll explore using local open source language models to
achieve the same results.
:::

With Marvin and Ibis, you can replicate the workflows below using other AI
service providers, local language models, and over 20+ data backends!

You'll need to install Marvin and Ibis to follow along:

```{.bash}
pip install 'ibis-framework[duckdb,examples]' marvin
```

Then import them and turn on Ibis interactive mode:

```{python}
import ibis  # <1>
import marvin  # <2>

from pydantic import BaseModel, Field  # <3>

ibis.options.interactive = True  # <4>
ibis.options.repr.interactive.max_rows = 6  # <5>
```

```{python}
# | code-fold: true
# | echo: false
_ = ibis.get_backend().raw_sql("set enable_progress_bar = false")
```

1. Import Ibis, the data engineering toolkit

> 2. Import Marvin, the AI engineering toolkit

Reviewer: why marvin? calling marvin `the` AI engineering toolkit is a bit too strong. are they our partner?

Reviewer 2: Just a comment on the label, it seems okay to call it the AI engineering toolkit given that it's on their website (https://askmarvin.ai)

![image](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/assets/417981/1649f6ab-ca05-404f-ae60-c3b226853582)

Author: yeah it's their tagline. perhaps ambitious but the only useful abstraction I've found in Python for working with LLMs, handling the logit bias trick for classification and schematization for other purposes

makes it easy and Pythonic to do just about anything you'd want to

Author: and they are not a partner

Reviewer 3: > why marvin? calling marvin `the` AI engineering toolkit is a bit too strong. are they our partner?

Similar thought, I believe our team already invested lots of time on the toolkit, I am not very sure how popular marvin is.

3. Import Pydantic, used to define data models for Marvin
4. Set Ibis to interactive mode to display the results of our queries
5. Set the maximum number of rows to display in interactive mode

> ## Synthetic data generation

Reviewer: good use case. maybe point out that data is important for models to learn and it's often expensive/time-consuming to collect data. data synthesis solves this problem

---
title: "Using language models for data"
author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-02-05"
image: thumbnail.png
categories:
    - blog
    - llms
    - duckdb
---

## Overview

This post will give an overview of how (large) language models (LMs) fit into

> data engineering, analyst, and science workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data engineering, data analyst, and data science workflows.
```

I understand the implied `data`, but it reads a bit like "science workflows" which means something very different than "data science workflows" 😄

## Use cases

There are three main use cases for language models for data practitioners:

1. Synthetic data generation
2. Natural language processing
3. Writing analytic code

We'll describe each and then demonstrate them with code.

## Setup

We'll use [Marvin](https://askmarvin.ai), the AI engineering toolkit, alongside
[Ibis](https://ibis-project.org), the data engineering toolkit, to demonstrate
the capabilities of language models for data using the default DuckDB backend.

:::{.callout-tip}
We'll use a cloud service provider (OpenAI) to demonstrate these capabilities.

> In a follow-up post, we'll explore using local "open source" language models to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a follow-up post, we'll explore using local open source language models to
```

The quotes feel a bit out of place here to me.

Author: fair enough. point is the models aren't really open source, but I'm not explaining that here. will go into that in the follow up post

3. Import Pydantic, used to define data models for Marvin
4. Set Ibis to interactive mode to display the results of our queries
5. Set the maximum number of rows to display in interactive mode

## Synthetic data generation

Language models can be used to generate synthetic data. This is useful for
testing, training, and other purposes. For example, you can use a language model
to generate synthetic data for training a machine learning model (including a
language model).

:::{.callout-tip}
This post was re-inspired by the [1 billion row challenge we recently solved
with Ibis on three local backends](../1brc/index.qmd) in which synthetic data
generated from a seed file was used to generate a billion rows.

With language models, we can reproduce this synthetic data and customize the
data produced with natural language!
:::

We'll start by replicating the data in the one billion row challenge, then move
over to our favorite penguins demo dataset to augment existing data with
synthetic data.

### Weather stations

We can generate synthetic weather stations in a few lines of code:

```{python}
class WeatherStation(BaseModel):  # <1>
    station: str = Field(

>         ...,

Reviewer 2: Are the ellipses necessary?

Author: I believe so

```

1. Define a Marvin function to generate a Python function from text
2. Define a Python function, wrapping a Marvin function with an Ibis UDF

Now we'll create a UDF from text to count the number of vowels in a string:

```{python}
udf = create_udf_from_text(  # <1>
    "a function named count_vowels that given an input string, returns an int w/ the number of vowels (y_included as a boolean option defaulted to False). NO DOCSTRING, we don't document our code in this household"  # <1>
)
print(udf)
```

1. Create a UDF from text

And execute that so the UDF is available:

```{python}
exec(udf)  # <1>
```

1. Execute the UDF code to make it available to call

Now we can augment our table with an analytic subroutine written by a language
model:

```{python}
t = t.mutate(  # <1>
    species_vowel_count=count_vowels(t.species),  # <1>
    island_vowel_count=count_vowels(t.island),  # <1>
).relocate("species", "species_vowel_count", "island", "island_vowel_count")  # <2>
t
```

1. Apply the UDF by mutating the table with the function
2. Rearrange the columns we care about to the front

:::{.callout-note}
You could use a LM to write a subroutine that uses a LM! This is an exercise

> left to the reader.

Reviewer 2: I think this requires some kind of turtle emoji or similar 😂 

Or perhaps `It's penguins all the way down`?

future posts.
:::

#### A more complex example

Let's see how this works on a query that requires joining two tables. We'll load
in some IMDB data:

```{python}
imdb_title_basics = ibis.examples.imdb_title_basics.fetch()  # <1>
imdb_title_basics
```

1. Load the IMDB title basics dataset from Ibis examples

```{python}
imdb_title_ratings = ibis.examples.imdb_title_ratings.fetch()  # <1>
imdb_title_ratings
```

1. Load the IMDB title ratings dataset from Ibis examples

```{python}
text = "the highest rated movies w/ over 100k ratings -- movies only"  # <1>

table_names = ["imdb_title_basics", "imdb_title_ratings"]  # <2>
table_schemas = [
    str(imdb_title_basics.schema()),
    str(imdb_title_ratings.schema()),
]
table_previews = [
    str(imdb_title_basics.limit(5)),
    str(imdb_title_ratings.limit(5)),
]  # <2>

sql = text_to_sql(text, table_names, table_schemas, table_previews)  # <3>
print(sql)
```

1. Create a natural language query
2. Provide the table names, schemas, and previews
3. Generate the SQL string

```{python}
r = imdb_title_basics.sql(sql)  # <1>
r
```

1. Execute the SQL string on the table

## Issues with language models today

> The biggest model with language models today is the cost. Similarly, the time
> for inferencing these models is the second biggest concern. Generating millions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The biggest issue with language models today is the cost, followed by their inference running time. Generating millions
```

    )  # <3>

summary = marvin.cast(  # <4>
    blog_text,  # <4>
    target=BlogSummary,  # <4>
)  # <4>
print(summary)
```

1. Import rich's print to better display Python objects
2. Read the blog post from a file
3. Define a data model for the blog post summary
4. Use Marvin to cast the blog post to the data model

To generate a thumbnail from the text:

```{python}
import os  # <1>
import httpx  # <1>

if not os.path.exists("thumbnail.png"):  # <2>
    key_points = "\n - ".join(summary.key_points)  # <3>
    thumbnail = marvin.paint(
        f"""Create a beautiful (dark background) thumbnail for the blog post with the following key points:

        {key_points}

        The post is about {summary.one_sentence_summary}

        A one paragraph summary:

        {summary.one_paragraph_summary}
        """
    )  # <3>

    image = httpx.get(thumbnail.data[0].url)  # <4>
    with open("thumbnail.png", "wb") as f:  # <5>
        f.write(image.content)  # <5>
```

1. Import extra libraries
2. Check if the thumbnail already exists
3. Use Marvin to generate a thumbnail from the blog post summary
4. Get the thumnail data from the URL
5. Write the data's content to a file

```{python}

> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt  # <1>
> 
> img = plt.imread("thumbnail.png")  # <2>
> plt.imshow(img)  # <2>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from IPython.display import Image  # <1>

Image(filename="./thumbnail.png")  # <2>
```

```

> 1. Import matplotlib to display the thumbnail

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Import IPython functionality to display the thumbnail
```

2. Display the thumbnail

## Next steps

Try this out yourself! All you need is an OpenAI account and the code above.

It's never been a better time to get involved with Ibis. [Join us on Zulip and
introduce yourself!](https://ibis-project.zulipchat.com/) More Ibis + language

> model content coming soon...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
model content coming soon.
```

            t.bill_depth_mm,  # <1>
            t.flipper_length_mm,  # <1>
            t.body_mass_g,  # <1>
        )  # <1>
    )
    .relocate("species", "island", "poem")  # <2>
    .cache()  # <3>
)
t
```

1. Apply the UDF by mutating the table with the function, using other columns as
 input
2. Rearrange the columns we care about to the front
3. Cache the table to avoid re-running the UDF

:::{.callout-note title="Is this RAG?" collapse="true"}
Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) is a term for retrieving information,
augmenting the prompt input to a language model with that information, and using
that prompt to generate a response with improved accuracy.

In the example above, we've retrieved information from a table (that could be in
a remote database) and used it to augment the prompt input to a language model.
The model then generated a response that incorporates the retrieved information,
improving accuracy.

> I would like to abolish the term RAG and instead just agree that we should
> always try to provide models with the appropriate context to provide high
> quality answers. - [Hamel
> Husain](https://twitter.com/HamelHusain/status/1709740984643596768)

> I would consider this RAG, but I also consider RAG to be a silly term.

Reviewer: `I also consider RAG to be a silly term.` <- this might alienate potential readers who like the term rAG

Author: removed the RAG callouts, I'll save my opinions for another time

:::

Nice! While not particularly useful in this case, the same process can be used
for generating product descriptions or other practical applications.

> ## Natural language processing

Reviewer: NLP is broad -- everything is this post can be considered NLP. maybe another name like LLM Operators, as opposed to join/groupby operators

Author: reworded

> This includes tasks like:

Reviewer: i think it's powerful to be able to say: extract sentiment of each row, then do a join/groupby, all in GPU (instead of doing sentiment on gpus and join/groupby on cpus)

- sentiment analysis
- named entity recognition
- part of speech tagging
- summarization
- translation
- question answering

Each of these tasks can be, to some extent, solved by traditional natural

> language processing (NLP) techniques. However, modern-day LMs can solve these

Reviewer: depends on what you mean by `solve`. i don't think these problems are solved, but in many cases, AI performance can be on par with or even better than human perf (better than human still doesn't mean it's solved)

Author: rewording -- "solved" -> "performed"

    """Translate `text` to `target_language`."""  # <1>

@ibis.udf.scalar.python  # <2>
def translate_text(text: str, target_language: str = "spanish") -> str:  # <2>
    return _translate_text(text, target_language)  # <3>
```

1. Define a Marvin function to translate text
2. Define a scalar Python UDF to apply the Marvin function to a column
3. Apply the Marvin function within the UDF

And apply that UDF to our penguins table:

```{python}
t = (
    t.mutate(translated_poem=translate_text(t.poem))  # <1>
    .relocate(t.columns[:5], "translated_poem")  # <2>
    .cache()  # <3>
)
t
```

1. Apply the UDF by mutating the table with the function
2. Rearrange the columns we care about to the front
3. Cache the table to avoid re-running the UDF

## Writing analytical code

Finally, language models can be used to write code. This is more useful with
systems around them to execute code, feed back error messages, make adjustments,
and so on. There are numerous pitfalls with language models writing code, but
they're fairly good at SQL.

### Three approaches

We can think of three approaches to analytical code with language models:

> 1. Use LMs in an analytic subroutine

Reviewer: like an agent?

Author: no, just what's shown above -- basically using LLMs in UDFs

future posts.
:::

#### A more complex example

Let's see how this works on a query that requires joining two tables. We'll load
in some IMDB data:

```{python}
imdb_title_basics = ibis.examples.imdb_title_basics.fetch()  # <1>
imdb_title_basics
```

1. Load the IMDB title basics dataset from Ibis examples

```{python}
imdb_title_ratings = ibis.examples.imdb_title_ratings.fetch()  # <1>
imdb_title_ratings
```

1. Load the IMDB title ratings dataset from Ibis examples

```{python}
text = "the highest rated movies w/ over 100k ratings -- movies only"  # <1>

table_names = ["imdb_title_basics", "imdb_title_ratings"]  # <2>
table_schemas = [
    str(imdb_title_basics.schema()),
    str(imdb_title_ratings.schema()),
]
table_previews = [
    str(imdb_title_basics.limit(5)),
    str(imdb_title_ratings.limit(5)),
]  # <2>

sql = text_to_sql(text, table_names, table_schemas, table_previews)  # <3>
print(sql)
```

1. Create a natural language query
2. Provide the table names, schemas, and previews
3. Generate the SQL string

```{python}
r = imdb_title_basics.sql(sql)  # <1>
r
```

1. Execute the SQL string on the table

> ## Issues with language models today

Reviewer: not sure how deep you want to go into this, but there are many other issues. like hallucinations: when you can't trust the generated responses

The biggest issue with language models today is the cost, followed by the time
it takes to generate responses. Generating a million rows of synthetic data

> points with state-of-the-art LLMs is prohibitively expensive and slow. If you're

Reviewer: would be nice to have a number here for the context to see how slow/expensive it is

Author: added some numbers

4. Return the generated poem

And apply that UDF to our penguins table:

```{python}
t = (
    t.mutate(  # <1>
        poem=penguin_poem(  # <1>
            t.species,  # <1>
            t.island,  # <1>
            t.bill_length_mm,  # <1>
            t.bill_depth_mm,  # <1>
            t.flipper_length_mm,  # <1>
            t.body_mass_g,  # <1>
        )  # <1>
    )
    .relocate("species", "island", "poem")  # <2>
    .cache()  # <3>
)
t
```

1. Apply the UDF by mutating the table with the function, using other columns as
 input
2. Rearrange the columns we care about to the front
3. Cache the table to avoid re-running the UDF

Nice! While not particularly useful in this case, the same process can be used
for generating product descriptions or other practical applications.

## Use in analytic subroutines

We've already done this above with the penguin poems to generate some data.
However, for real-world use cases the more common use of language models will be
to extract structured data from unsstructured text.

This includes tasks like:

- sentiment analysis
- data labeling
- named entity recognition
- part of speech tagging
- summarization
- translation
- question answering

> 

Author: you could but I haven't really understood why these are useful (as opposed to storing text)
